ForensiClaim PII Extraction Engine for Refund Fraud Detection — Engineering Report
1. Overview
The Problem: Extracting structured customer identity and refund fields from unstructured support tickets to support refund fraud investigation.
The Solution: An automated, offline REST API utilizing Small Language Models (SLMs) and heuristic routing to output structured, validated JSON.
Why Local SLMs?
Data Privacy: Tickets contain sensitive PII. Local processing ensures data never leaves the internal network.
Latency: Eliminates network round trips and rate limits associated with cloud API calls.
Cost: Zero marginal cost per ticket compared to cloud-based per-token billing.

2. Deployment Environment
Hardware: Intel Core i5 CPU
Memory: 16GB Shared RAM
Inference Engine: Local deployment using Ollama

3. Evaluation Dataset
To measure structural determinism and logic, models were evaluated against a custom 24-case adversarial benchmark suite. Test cases included:
Missing core entities (name, email, amount)
Multiple conflicting amounts or emails
Forwarded email chains and deep quoted replies
Agent signature noise
Negation and denied refunds
Multilingual text and OCR corruption
Amounts written in English words
Currency symbols versus ISO codes
Fake embedded JSON bait

4. Phase 1: Inference & Hardware Benchmarking
Objective: Ensure the models do not introduce unacceptable pipeline latency. Evaluated Meta Llama 3.2 (1B), Alibaba Cloud Qwen 2.5 (1.5B), Google Gemma 3 (1B), and DeepSeek-R1.
Latency Overhead: DeepSeek-R1 was excluded from further testing. Preliminary tests suggested reasoning-heavy inference caused unacceptable latency for production throughput.
Throughput Parity: The remaining three models stabilized between 18.5 and 22.3 Tokens Per Second (TPS).
Runtime Observation: The first request latency was significantly higher (cold load, 3.0+ seconds). Subsequent requests were much faster (dropping Time To First Token by 70%) while the model stayed in memory.

5. Phase 2: Structural Determinism & Model Selection
Objective: The pipeline requires strictly formatted data. Creative text generation breaks database schemas. Temperature was enforced at 0.0.
Llama 3.2 (1B): Rejected for severe data omission (failed to extract explicitly stated entities).
Gemma 3 (1B): Rejected for aggressive data hallucination (fabricated entities when faced with missing data).
Final Model Choice: Alibaba Cloud Qwen 2.5 (1.5B) was selected because it offered the best balance of accuracy, speed, JSON discipline, edge-case handling, and local hardware compatibility.

6. Phase 3: Prompt Engineering
Objective: Address the baseline extraction accuracy of Qwen 2.5. The model initially failed to infer ISO codes and handled complex formatting poorly.
Explicit Constraints: The system prompt was updated to strictly map currency symbols (e.g., "$", "₹") to 3-letter ISO codes.
Few-Shot Prompting: Three distinct input/output JSON examples were injected directly into the instructions to handle specific edge cases.
Accuracy Progression Benchmarks
Stage
Accuracy
Baseline Qwen 2.5 (1.5B)
58.30%
Currency Prompt Fix
70.80%
Few-shot Prompting
79.17%
API Cascade + Fallback (Final)
83.30%


7. Phase 4: Validation, Reflexion & The Cascade Architecture
Objective: Overcome the performance ceiling on the 1.5B model and handle syntax crashes. Engineered a two-step safety net within the FastAPI routing logic.
Output Validation: Every model response passed through strict Pydantic schema validation:
JSON
{
  "name": string | null,
  "email": string | null,
  "refund_amount": number | null,
  "currency": string | null
}


Invalid outputs immediately triggered retry logic.
The Reflexion Mechanism (Retry): When the primary model outputs invalid JSON syntax, Pydantic catches the exception. The script feeds the exact ValidationError text back to the model and reprompts it to repair the syntax.
The LLM Cascade (Mitigation): If the schema is valid but the payload fails heuristic business checks (e.g., missing both Name and Amount, or identifying a quoted thread), the API intercepts the ticket. It routes the payload to a heavier fallback model: Meta Llama 3.2 (3B).
Result: The 3B model successfully resolved complex contextual edge cases, pushing the final API accuracy to 83.3%.

8. Remaining Failure Modes
Strong engineers acknowledge limitations. The remaining failure margin primarily consists of semantic interpretation rather than system crashes:
Obfuscated Data: Semantic normalization overrides strict nulls (e.g., converting "name at gmail dot com" to a valid email format).
Dominant Entity Extraction Bias: Strong entities (valid emails or dollar amounts) inside administrative or system notifications occasionally override negative constraints ("no customer action needed").
Deep Quoted Thread Attribution: Determining the correct user across highly nested email histories.
Ambiguous Multiple Customers: Extracting the correct primary user when multiple individuals are discussed in the same ticket.

9. Future Production Roadmap
To move this system from an initial API into a fully mature microservice, the following improvements are planned:
Human Review Queue: Route low-confidence extractions or specific heuristic failures to a manual review queue for human-in-the-loop (HITL) resolution.
Hybrid Regex + LLM Pipeline: Combine deterministic regex rules with SLM generation to further mitigate the dominant entity extraction bias.
Confidence Scoring: Implement internal logging to assign confidence weights to extracted entities based on internal retries and fallback usage.
Fine-Tuned Extraction Model: Transition from prompt-engineering a base model to utilizing a LoRA fine-tuned model strictly trained on the specific refund ticket schema.
PostgreSQL Logging Pipeline: Log raw tickets, prompt versions, routing paths, and extraction times to a relational database to monitor model drift and identify new edge cases.

